README.md, before:

# Python_template_IDS706

This repository provides a clean, modular Python project template tailored for IDS 706: Data Engineering Systems. It, using cloud-based VScode extension, includes the necessary structure, tools, and automation to get you started with writing production-level Python code.

## Project Overview
This template helps students and developers:

Quickly spin up a Python project using either local development or GitHub Codespaces.

Integrate development best practices: testing, linting, formatting, and CI/CD.

Focus on writing code, not configuration.

## Features

This template provides a structured way to set up a Python project with essential tools for development, testing, and continuous integration. It includes:
- A `Makefile` for easy command execution.
- A virtual environment setup for dependency management.
- A devcontainer configuration for GitHub Codespaces
- A simple Python script with functions.
- Unit tests to ensure code correctness.
- GitHub Actions for continuous integration to automate linting and testing.
- Github Copilot for AI-assisted coding.

## Project Setup and Usage Example

### Two approaches:

##### GitHub Repo Python Template (Local Setup Workflow)

- Clone/Start the repository locally or use GitHub Codespaces without a container.
- Set up a Python virtual environment (optional) and install dependencies using either pip install -r requirements.txt or make install.

##### Cloud-based Containerized Setup Workflow (With Dev Container)

- Create a GitHub repository.
- Launch a Codespace from the repository.
- Add a Dev Container configuration using VS Code.
- Rebuild the container to apply changes.

Once your environment is ready, the following steps are common to both approaches:

- Create project files: Makefile, XX.py, test_XX.py, and requirements.txt.
- Write your Python code and tests in the appropriate files.
- Run Makefile commands as needed: make install, make test, make format, make lint, make clean.
- Commit and push your changes to GitHub.
- Enable GitHub Actions for automation/Continuous Integration.

### Create a new GitHub Repository
1. Go to [GitHub](https://github.com) and create a new repository named e.g., `IDS706_python_template`.      
   - Make sure to select "Public" or "Private" based on your preference.
   - Optionally, add a description.  
2. enable the "Add a README file" option.
3. Click on "Create repository".
4. Click codespaces and then "Create codespace on main".

### Create new files in the repository (using the terminal or manually)
```bash
touch Makefile
touch hello.py
touch test_hello.py
touch requirements.txt
```

### Setup Python Environment (if you're not using a Dev Container)
If you're working outside of a dev container, you can manually create and activate a virtual environment. If you do so, for consistency, it's recommended to name the environment the same as your repository.

```bash
python3 -m venv ~/.IDS706_python_template
source ~/.IDS706_python_template/bin/activate
```


### Create a Makefile
```makefile
install:
	pip install --upgrade pip &&\
		pip install -r requirements.txt

format:
	black *.py

lint:
	flake8 hello.py

test:
	python -m pytest -vv --cov=hello test_hello.py

clean:
    rm -rf __pycache__ .pytest_cache .coverage

all: install format lint test

```
### Create a requirements.txt file
```text
pylint
flake8
pytest
click
black
pytest-cov
```

### VS Code Dev Containers (Suggested)
Open a sample in a container by pressing shift+command+P, then select `Dev Containers: Add Development Container Configuration Files...`. Choose the Python 3.11 template, and it will create the necessary files for you.

##### Rebuild or update your container
after you make changes to your container, such as installing a packages, you'll rebuild your container for your changes to take effect. by pressing shift+command+P, then select `Dev Containers: Rebuild Container` or `Codespaces: Rebuild Container` command so the modifications are picked up.  


### Run the Makefile (required if you do not use Dev Containers)
```bash 
make install
```


### Create a simple Python script
```python
def say_hello(name: str) -> str:
    """Return a greeting message to students in the IDS class."""
    return f"Hello, {name}, welcome to Data Engineering Systems (IDS 706)!"


def add(a: int, b: int) -> int:
    """Return the sum of two numbers."""
    return a + b
```

### Create a test file
```python
from hello import say_hello, add

def test_say_hello():
    assert (
        say_hello("Annie")
        == "Hello, Annie, welcome to Data Engineering Systems (IDS 706)!"
    )

def test_add():
    assert add(2, 3) == 5
```

### Run the tests
```bash 
make test
``` 
### Format the code
```bash 
make format
```
### Lint the code
```bash
make lint
```
### Clean up the environment
```bash
make clean
```
### Commit and push your changes via commands or User Interface
```bash
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit with Python template setup"   
git push origin main
``` 
### View your repository

### Enable GitHub Actions

1. Go to your repository on GitHub.
2. Click on the "Actions" tab.
3. Click on "New workflow".
4. Select "Set up a workflow yourself".
5. Replace the content with the following YAML configuration:

```yaml
name: Python Template for IDS706

on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v4
    - name: Set up Python
      uses: actions/setup-python@v5
      with:
        python-version: '3.11'
    - name: Install dependencies
      run: |
        python -m pip install --upgrade pip
        pip install -r requirements.txt
    - name: Lint with flake8
      run: flake8 hello.py
    - name: Run tests
      run: pytest --cov=hello

```
6. Commit and push this file to your repository.
7. GitHub Actions will run automatically on every push or pull request!

## View the Actions tab 

1. Go to the "Actions" tab in your repository.
2. You should see the workflow running.
3. Click on the latest workflow run to see the details.



## Additional Resources
- [GitHub Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en)
- [Python Virtual Environments](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html)
- [Installing Python and conda](https://www.practicaldatascience.org/notebooks/PDS_not_yet_in_coursera/00_setup_env/setup_python.html)
- [Setting Up Visual Studio Code](https://www.practicaldatascience.org/notebooks/PDS_not_yet_in_coursera/00_setup_env/setup_vscode.html)
- [GitHub Dev-Container Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/setting-up-your-project-for-codespaces/adding-a-dev-container-configuration/setting-up-your-python-project-for-codespaces)
- [Makefile Documentation](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html)
- [GitHub Actions Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)
- [GitHub Copilot Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot)

## Acknowledgments
This template was created as part of the Data Engineering Systems (IDS 706) course to help students set up their projects efficiently using modern development practices.   

## References
https://github.com/zhongyuan-duke/IDS-706-week-1-template/blob/main/README.md
ChatGPT

Commit message:

Add force push instructions to README
Added instructions for force pushing local changes to Git.

README.md, after:

# Python_template_IDS706

This repository provides a clean, modular Python project template tailored for IDS 706: Data Engineering Systems. It, using cloud-based VScode extension, includes the necessary structure, tools, and automation to get you started with writing production-level Python code.

## Project Overview
This template helps students and developers:

Quickly spin up a Python project using either local development or GitHub Codespaces.

Integrate development best practices: testing, linting, formatting, and CI/CD.

Focus on writing code, not configuration.

## Features

This template provides a structured way to set up a Python project with essential tools for development, testing, and continuous integration. It includes:
- A `Makefile` for easy command execution.
- A virtual environment setup for dependency management.
- A devcontainer configuration for GitHub Codespaces
- A simple Python script with functions.
- Unit tests to ensure code correctness.
- GitHub Actions for continuous integration to automate linting and testing.
- Github Copilot for AI-assisted coding.

## Project Setup and Usage Example

### Two approaches:

##### GitHub Repo Python Template (Local Setup Workflow)

- Clone/Start the repository locally or use GitHub Codespaces without a container.
- Set up a Python virtual environment (optional) and install dependencies using either pip install -r requirements.txt or make install.

##### Cloud-based Containerized Setup Workflow (With Dev Container)

- Create a GitHub repository.
- Launch a Codespace from the repository.
- Add a Dev Container configuration using VS Code.
- Rebuild the container to apply changes.

Once your environment is ready, the following steps are common to both approaches:

- Create project files: Makefile, XX.py, test_XX.py, and requirements.txt.
- Write your Python code and tests in the appropriate files.
- Run Makefile commands as needed: make install, make test, make format, make lint, make clean.
- Commit and push your changes to GitHub.
- Enable GitHub Actions for automation/Continuous Integration.

### Create a new GitHub Repository
1. Go to [GitHub](https://github.com) and create a new repository named e.g., `IDS706_python_template`.      
   - Make sure to select "Public" or "Private" based on your preference.
   - Optionally, add a description.  
2. enable the "Add a README file" option.
3. Click on "Create repository".
4. Click codespaces and then "Create codespace on main".

### Create new files in the repository (using the terminal or manually)
```bash
touch Makefile
touch hello.py
touch test_hello.py
touch requirements.txt
```

### Setup Python Environment (if you're not using a Dev Container)
If you're working outside of a dev container, you can manually create and activate a virtual environment. If you do so, for consistency, it's recommended to name the environment the same as your repository.

```bash
python3 -m venv ~/.IDS706_python_template
source ~/.IDS706_python_template/bin/activate
```


### Create a Makefile
```makefile
install:
	pip install --upgrade pip &&\
		pip install -r requirements.txt

format:
	black *.py

lint:
	flake8 hello.py

test:
	python -m pytest -vv --cov=hello test_hello.py

clean:
    rm -rf __pycache__ .pytest_cache .coverage

all: install format lint test

```
### Create a requirements.txt file
```text
pylint
flake8
pytest
click
black
pytest-cov
```

### VS Code Dev Containers (Suggested)
Open a sample in a container by pressing shift+command+P, then select `Dev Containers: Add Development Container Configuration Files...`. Choose the Python 3.11 template, and it will create the necessary files for you.

##### Rebuild or update your container
after you make changes to your container, such as installing a packages, you'll rebuild your container for your changes to take effect. by pressing shift+command+P, then select `Dev Containers: Rebuild Container` or `Codespaces: Rebuild Container` command so the modifications are picked up.  


### Run the Makefile (required if you do not use Dev Containers)
```bash 
make install
```


### Create a simple Python script
```python
def say_hello(name: str) -> str:
    """Return a greeting message to students in the IDS class."""
    return f"Hello, {name}, welcome to Data Engineering Systems (IDS 706)!"


def add(a: int, b: int) -> int:
    """Return the sum of two numbers."""
    return a + b
```

### Create a test file
```python
from hello import say_hello, add

def test_say_hello():
    assert (
        say_hello("Annie")
        == "Hello, Annie, welcome to Data Engineering Systems (IDS 706)!"
    )

def test_add():
    assert add(2, 3) == 5
```

### Run the tests
```bash 
make test
``` 
### Format the code
```bash 
make format
```
### Lint the code
```bash
make lint
```
### Clean up the environment
```bash
make clean
```
### Commit and push your changes via commands or User Interface
```bash
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit with Python template setup"   
git push origin main
``` 
### View your repository

### Enable GitHub Actions

1. Go to your repository on GitHub.
2. Click on the "Actions" tab.
3. Click on "New workflow".
4. Select "Set up a workflow yourself".
5. Replace the content with the following YAML configuration:

```yaml
name: Python Template for IDS706

on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v4
    - name: Set up Python
      uses: actions/setup-python@v5
      with:
        python-version: '3.11'
    - name: Install dependencies
      run: |
        python -m pip install --upgrade pip
        pip install -r requirements.txt
    - name: Lint with flake8
      run: flake8 hello.py
    - name: Run tests
      run: pytest --cov=hello

```
6. Commit and push this file to your repository.
7. GitHub Actions will run automatically on every push or pull request!

## View the Actions tab 

1. Go to the "Actions" tab in your repository.
2. You should see the workflow running.
3. Click on the latest workflow run to see the details.

## If changed locally when local and git do not sync
force push to keep local changes to git
```
git push origin main --force
```

## Additional Resources
- [GitHub Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en)
- [Python Virtual Environments](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html)
- [Installing Python and conda](https://www.practicaldatascience.org/notebooks/PDS_not_yet_in_coursera/00_setup_env/setup_python.html)
- [Setting Up Visual Studio Code](https://www.practicaldatascience.org/notebooks/PDS_not_yet_in_coursera/00_setup_env/setup_vscode.html)
- [GitHub Dev-Container Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/setting-up-your-project-for-codespaces/adding-a-dev-container-configuration/setting-up-your-python-project-for-codespaces)
- [Makefile Documentation](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html)
- [GitHub Actions Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)
- [GitHub Copilot Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot)

## Acknowledgments
This template was created as part of the Data Engineering Systems (IDS 706) course to help students set up their projects efficiently using modern development practices.   

## References
https://github.com/zhongyuan-duke/IDS-706-week-1-template/blob/main/README.md
ChatGPT
